---
layout: post
title: "A \"real world\" exploit [CVE-2022-0185]"
date: 2023-08-21 12:00:00 +0530
categories: pwn kernel
---

You can find the commented exploit script [here](https://github.com/k1R4/exploits/blob/main/CVE-2022-0185/exploit.c) 

## Preface
I have been learning kernel exploitation over the past year. I mostly worked on past CTF challenges and attempted some during active CTFs as well. I briefly tried some Windows kernel exploitation through HEVD, but I kept coming back to linux since I found it fun to work with. Given all this, I wanted to know what it would take to go from solving kernel challenges in CTFs to writing real exploits. [Kyle](https://twitter.com/ky1ebot) from shellphish, who has been guiding me recently, suggested that I try CVE-2022-0185. The reason he recommended this CVE was since it was a fairly simple bug, easy to exploit and is well documented. Hence the reason for the qoutes on "real world" in the title. Before we begin, huge thanks to Kyle for guiding me and motivating me to write this blog post.

## CVE-2022-0185
This CVE was actually found by a popular CTF team, Crusaders of Rust. [FizzBuzz101](https://willsroot.io), from CoR, has an amazing writeup covering this CVE and their exploit for it. I used that as my [primary reference](https://www.willsroot.io/2022/01/cve-2022-0185.html) when writing this exploit. I chose to write my exploit for Ubuntu 20.04, running `5.11.0-44` since the original writeup used the same kernel.

Some quick tips:
 - Old kernel images can be obtained using: `sudo apt install linux-image-<version>-generic`
 - vmlinux can be obtained by adding the ddebs repo and running: `sudo apt-get install linux-image-<version>-dbgsym`
 - They can be found under `/boot` and `/usr/lib/debug/boot/` respectively

The bug is a heap overflow in kmalloc-4k occuring in `legacy_parse_param()`, which can be triggered from userspace using `fsconfig()` syscall. The original writeup describes the bug and how it can be triggered in detail, so I won't be covering that. However I will be going through the exploit and the proces of how I managed to get it to work on a live system, having only dealt with minimal instances on QEMU with no system noise.


## Getting leaks
First off we have to beat KASLR. We need code leaks in order to do that. Here we have a vulnerability that lets us overflow into the next adjacent page from a kmalloc-4k chunk. Therefore its better if we target objects in kmalloc-4k with critical members at the start of the object. The obvious choice here is to use the `msg_msg` object. Writeups by [d3v17](https://syst3mfailure.io/wall-of-perdition/) and [Alexander Popov](https://a13xp0p0v.github.io/2021/02/09/CVE-2021-26708.html) go into the specifics of abusing `msg_msg` for arbitrary r/w. It is recommended to go through one of them before proceeding here.

In order to get an address leak, 
 - Spray `seq_operations` objects in kmalloc-32 to be used later for leaking
 - Use `msgsnd()` to allocate `msg_msg` in kmalloc-4k and corresponding `msg_msgseg` in kmalloc-32
 - Use `fsconfig()` to overflow to adjacent `msg_msg` object and overwrite the `m_ts` member
 - Try `msgrcv()` with `MSG_COPY` flag to prevent the msg objects from being cleaned and potentially causing a panic
 - If successful, `msgrcv()` will copy OOB bytes, containing code address from neighboring `seq_operations` objects
 ```c
 struct msg_msg {
	struct list_head m_list;
	long m_type;
	size_t m_ts;		/* message text size */
	struct msg_msgseg *next;
	void *security;
	/* the actual message follows immediately */
};
 ```

Similarly for a heap leak,
 - Spray `simple_xattr` objects in kmalloc-64 with `name` member having pointers to kmalloc-32. This is done by using `setxattr()` on a tmpfs
 - This time have the corresponding `msg_msgseg` in kmalloc-64 instead
 - Trigger the overflow and overwrite `size` member of `msg_msg`
 - Use the OOB read to leak `name` member of neighboring `simple_xattr` which is a heap address pointing to an active kmalloc-32 slab

```c
struct simple_xattr {
	struct list_head list;
	char *name;
	size_t size;
	char value[];
};
```


## Pwning
The goal here would be a `modprobe_path` overwrite since it would be the simplest. The reference I mentioned earlier went the route of using `msg_msg` to achieve arbitrary write but I wanted to try something different. Kyle suggested that I try using the unlinking of `simple_xattr`. I must note that this technique might not work in newer kernels, since `simple_xattr` now uses rbtree instead of a doubly linked list. 

I referred to this [writeup](https://www.starlabs.sg/blog/2022/06-io_uring-new-code-new-bugs-and-a-new-exploit-technique/#unlinking-attack) from starlabs to abuse the unlink. The difference here is that overwriting the `list_head` causes the next member, `name` to be overwritten, since overflow ends with the bytes ",\x00". `removexattr()` causes the `name` pointer to be freed. Having an invalid pointer would cause kernel panic. In order to avoid that we overwrite that pointer with the previously leaked name pointer. Also heap leak is used here instead of physmap leak.

In short,
 - Spray `msg_msg` objects in kmalloc-4k to occupy pages which helped increase reliability
 - Use `setxattr()` to allocate a `simple_xattr` object in kmalloc-4k
 - Use `fsconfig()` to overflow and overwrite `list_head` pointers to `modprobe_path` & `0xffxxxxxx2f706d74` and `name` to leaked heap address
 - Try `removexattr()` which will trigger unlink in `simple_xattr`,
	- The unknown bytes in `0xffxxxxxx2f706d74` is decided based on heap leak, but physmap could be used here as well
	- prev = `modprobe_path+1` and next = `0xffxxxxxx2f706d74`
	- `next->prev = prev` doesn't help here so it can be ignored. Although this is why we need `next` to be a writeable address.
	- `prev->next = next` translates to `*(u64 *)(modprobe_path+1) = 0xffxxxxxx2f706d74`
	- So `/sbin/modprobe` is overwritten to `/tmp/xxxprobe`

```c
static inline void __list_del(struct list_head * prev, struct list_head * next)
{
	next->prev = prev;
	WRITE_ONCE(prev->next, next);
}
```


## Barebones to a live system
I initially wrote the exploit by copying the kernel image and using a CTF challenge like setup with qemu and a minimal rootfs. This was a good decision in hindsight. Debugging a standard installation of Ubuntu on a VM through kgdb was too slow. Maybe using kgdboe might've been faster but either way rebooting the VM would've been a hassle. This definitely sped up the whole process and I will probably follow this until I find a less janky method that is at least equally as fast.

First, I started off by running the exploit on a live Ubuntu VM running on VMWare Workstation and to nobody's surprise it failed. I didn't even get a kernel panic after running it multiple times. Having worked with only ctf challenges running on qemu with no system noise, I was using a stratergy of spray and pray. I sprayed objects, triggered the bug and hoped for a successful run.

After reading some CVE writeups, I noticed that usually the exploit continously tries to trigger the bug waiting for a successful run. Although this increases chances of a successful hit, it also has chances of causing a panic. Spraying objects appropriately and grooming the slabs will decrease chances of a panic. This requires some tweaking and fiddling. I ended up doing it like a caveman, by trial and error. There are probably much better ways to do.

In the end, I had a fairly reliable exploit that works about 9/10 times on an Ubuntu VM with varying amounts of system noise and memory.

## Conclusion
I learnt a lot from writing the exploit but with upcoming mitigations like `CONFIG_RANDOM_KMALLOC_CACHES`, `CONFIG_SLAB_VIRTUAL` and common objects being moved to `kmalloc-cg` caches, exploitation is becoming harder. The techniques used in this blog are already probably obsolete. I plan on working with newer CVEs to learn new techniques as well as explore eBPF and networking stack of linux.